---
title: "SPEC2000"
date: 2018-05-13T18:51:37-04:00
draft: false
weight: 10
---
{{% notice warning %}}
This is a work in-progress. Everyone should feel free to extend this page with their experiences to help new users get started.
{{% /notice %}}


#### cpu2000.py

##### Input sets and Binaries

Several of the cpu2000 benchmarks for our regression tests.
Unfortunately because of licensing restrictions we can't provide the
binaries or input files, however to make this a bit easier we have
created cpu2000.py. Currently the script is tailored to our particular
organization of the binaries and input files. To make the python work
for you you'll minimally have to change `spec_dist` to point to wherever
you keep your cpu2000 binaries/input sets. We have our binaries and
input sets organized in the following directory structure:

`cpu2000/binaries/ARCH/OPSYS/BENCHMARK`
`cpu2000/data/BENCHMARK/INPUTSET/FILES`

Where ARCH is alpha or sparc, OPSYS is linux or tru64, BENCHMARK is the
name of the spec binary (e.g gzip), INPUTSET is the input files (e.g.
smred), and FILES are the specific input files. If you can't create this
structure you'll have to mess with cpu2000.py to change how it finds
files.

##### How to use it

The cpu2000.py configuration file takes this data and creates an m5
workload parameter based on benchmark name, isa, operating system, and
input set. If you take a look at tests/long/00.gzip/test.py you can see
an example of this, but in brief:

    from cpu2000 import gzip_log
    workload = gzip_log('alpha', 'tru64', 'smred')
    root.system.cpu.workload = workload.makeLiveProcess()

Assuming you have a machine configured normally above that blob would
correctly run the gzip log spec2000 benchmark for alpha/tru64 with the
smred input set. __NOTOC__

#### SPEC2K Command Lines (Syscall Emulation)

If you would like to run SPEC2K using syscall-emulation mode, a good
reference for the correct command line options can be found here:

  - [SPEC2K INT Command
    Lines](http://kbarr.net/specint2000-commandlines)
  - [SPEC2K FP Command Lines](http://kbarr.net/specfp2000-commandlines)

(Note: these example command lines aren't for reduced/minimized input
sets.)

Then, if you are unable to use some of the aforementioned cpu2000.py
scripts, you could try something like this to run statically-linked,
ALPHA, eon
    binary:

    $ build/ALPHA/gem5.debug configs/example/se.py --cmd=eon00 --options="chair.control.cook
    chair.camera chair.surfaces chair.cook.ppm ppm pixels_out.cook"


