---
title: "Debugging simulated code"
date: 2018-05-13T18:51:37-04:00
draft: false
weight: 1000
---


gem5 has built-in support for gdb's remote debugger interface. If you
are interested in monitoring what the code on the simulated machine is
doing---the kernel (in FS mode) or program (in SE mode)---you can fire
up gdb on the host platform and have it talk to the simulated gem5
system as if it were a real machine/process (only better, since gem5
executions are deterministic and gem5's remote debugger interface is
guaranteed not to perturb execution on the simulated system).

If you are simulating a system that uses a different ISA from the host
you're running on, you'll need a cross-architecture gdb; see
[below](#Getting_a_cross-architecture_gdb "wikilink") for instructions.
If you are simulating the native ISA of your host, you can very likely
just use the pre-installed native gdb.

When gem5 is run, each CPU listens for a remote debugging connection on
a TCP port. The first port allocated is generally 7000, though if a port
is in use, the next port will be tried.

To attach the remote debugger, it's necessary to have a copy of the
kernel and of the source. Also to view the kernel's call stack, you must
make sure Linux was built with the necessary debug configuration
parameters enabled. To run the remote debugger, do the following:

    ziff% gdb-linux-alpha arch/alpha/boot/vmlinux
    GNU gdb
    Copyright 2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
    GDB is free software, covered by the GNU General Public License, and you are
    welcome to change it and/or distribute copies of it under certain conditions.
    Type "show copying" to see the conditions.
    There is absolutely no warranty for GDB.  Type "show warranty" for details.
    This GDB was configured as "--host=i686-pc-linux-gnu --target=alpha-linux"...
    (no debugging symbols found)...
    (gdb) set remote Z-packet on                [ This can be put in .gdbinit ]
    (gdb) target remote ziff:7000
    Remote debugging using ziff:7000
    0xfffffc0000496844 in strcasecmp (a=0xfffffc0000b13a80 "", b=0x0)
        at arch/alpha/lib/strcasecmp.c:23
    23              } while (ca == cb && ca != '\0');
    (gdb)

The gem5 simulator is already running and the target remote command
connects to the already running simulator and stops it in the middle of
execution. You can set breakpoints and use the debugger to debug the
kernel. It is also possible to use the remote debugger to debug console
code and palcode. Setting that up is similar, but a how to will be left
for future work.

If you're using both the remote debugger and the debugger on the
simulator, it is possible to trigger the remote debugger from the main
debugger by doing a 'call debugger()'. Before you do this you'll need to
figure out what CPU (the cpu id) you want to debug and set
current_debugger to that cpuid. If you only have one cpu, then it will
be cpuid 0, however if there are multiple cpus you will need to match
the cpu id with the corresponding port number for the remote gdb
session. For example, using the following sample output from M5, calling
the kernel debugger for cpu 3 requires the kernel debugger to be
listening on port 7001.

    %./build/ALPHA/gem5.debug configs/example/fs.py
    ...
    making dual system
    Global frequency set at 1000000000000 ticks per second
    Listening for testsys connection on port 3456
    Listening for drivesys connection on port 3457
    0: testsys.remote_gdb.listener: listening for remote gdb #0 on port 7002
    0: testsys.remote_gdb.listener: listening for remote gdb #1 on port 7003
    0: testsys.remote_gdb.listener: listening for remote gdb #2 on port 7000
    0: testsys.remote_gdb.listener: listening for remote gdb #3 on port 7001
    0: drivesys.remote_gdb.listener: listening for remote gdb #4 on port 7004
    0: drivesys.remote_gdb.listener: listening for remote gdb #5 on port 7005
    0: drivesys.remote_gdb.listener: listening for remote gdb #6 on port 7006
    0: drivesys.remote_gdb.listener: listening for remote gdb #7 on port 7007

## Getting a cross-architecture gdb

To use a remote debugger with gem5, the most important part is that you
have gdb compiled to work with the target system you're simulating (e.g.
alpha-linux if simulating an Alpha target, arm-linux if simulating an
ARM target, etc). It is possible to compile an non-native architecture
gdb on an x86 machine for example. All that must be done is add the
--target= option to configure when you compile gdb. You may also get
pre-compiled debuggers with cross compilers. See
[Download](Download "wikilink") for links to some cross compilers that
include debuggers.

    % wget http://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/gdb/gdb-6.3.tar.gz
    --08:05:33--  http://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/gdb/gdb-6.3.tar.gz
               => `gdb-6.3.tar.gz'
    Resolving ftp.gnu.org... done.
    Connecting to ftp.gnu.org[199.232.41.7]:80... connected.
    HTTP request sent, awaiting response... 200 OK
    Length: 17,374,476 [application/x-tar]

    100%[====================================>] 17,374,476   216.57K/s    ETA 00:00

    08:06:52 (216.57 KB/s) - `gdb-6.3.tar.gz' saved [17374476/17374476]

    % tar xfz gdb-6.3.tar.gz
    % cd gdb-6.3
    % ./configure --target=alpha-linux
    <configure output....>
    % make
    <make output...this may take a while>

The end result is gdb/gdb which will work for remote debugging.

## Target-specific instructions

### ARM Target

If you're planning to debug an ARM kernel you'll need a reasonably new
version of gdb (7.1 or greater). Additionally, you'll have to manually
specify the tspecs like this (port number may be different). The tspec
file is available in the gdb source
code:

`set remote Z-packet on`
`set tdesc filename path/to/features/arm-with-neon.xml`
`symbol-file `<path to vmlinux used for gem5>
`target remote <ip addr of host running gem5 or if local host 127.0.0.1>:7000`
