---
title: "Linux Kernel"
date: 2018-05-13T16:54:44-04:00
draft: false
---

This page contains instructions for building up-to-date kernels for gem5
running on ARM.

# Prerequisites

These instructions are for running headless systems. That is a more
"server" style system where there is no frame-buffer. The description
has been created using the latest known-working tag in the repositories
linked below, however the tables in each section list previous tags that
are known to work. To built the kernels on an x86 host you'll need ARM
cross compilers and the device tree compiler. If you're running a
reasonably new version of Ubuntu or Debian you can get required software
through
    apt:

    apt-get install  gcc-arm-linux-gnueabihf gcc-aarch64-linux-gnu device-tree-compiler

If you can't use these pre-made compilers the next easiest way to obtain
the required compilers from
[Linaro](http://releases.linaro.org/latest/components/toolchain/binaries/).

Depending on the exact source of your cross compilers, the compiler
names used below will required small changes.

To actually run the kernel, you'll need to download or compile gem5's
bootloader. See the [bootloaders](#Bootloaders "wikilink") section in
this documents for details.

# Linux 4.x

Newer gem5 kernels for ARM (v4.x and later) are based on the vanilla
Linux kernel and typically have a small number of patches to make them
work better with gem5. The patches are optional and you should be able
to use a vanilla kernel as well. However, this requires you to configure
the kernel yourself. Newer kernels all use the VExpress_GEM5_V1 gem5
platform for both AArch32 and AArch64. The required DTB files to
describe the hardware to the OS ship with gem5. To build them, execute
this command:

    make -C system/arm/dt

## Kernel Checkout

To checkout the kernel, execute the following command:

    git clone https://gem5.googlesource.com/arm/linux

The repository contains a tag per gem5 kernel releases and working
branches for major Linux revisions. Check the [project
page](https://gem5-review.googlesource.com/#/admin/projects/arm/linux)
for a list of tags and branches. The clone command will, by default,
check out the latest release branch. To checkout the v4.4 branch,
execute the following in the repository:

    git checkout -b gem5/v4.4

## AArch32

To compile the kernel, execute the following commands in the repository:

    make ARCH=arm CROSS_COMPILE=arm-linux-gnueabihf- gem5_defconfig
    make ARCH=arm CROSS_COMPILE=arm-linux-gnueabihf- -j `nproc`

Testing the just built
    kernel:

    ./build/ARM/gem5.opt configs/example/fs.py --kernel=/tmp/linux-arm-gem5/vmlinux --machine-type=VExpress_GEM5_V1 \
        --dtb-file=$PWD/system/arm/dt/armv7_gem5_v1_1cpu.dtb

## AArch64

To compile the kernel, execute the following commands in the repository:

    make ARCH=arm64 CROSS_COMPILE=aarch64-linux-gnu- gem5_defconfig
    make ARCH=arm64 CROSS_COMPILE=aarch64-linux-gnu- -j `nproc`

Testing the just built
    kernel:

    ./build/ARM/gem5.opt configs/example/fs.py --kernel=/tmp/linux-arm-gem5/vmlinux --machine-type=VExpress_GEM5_V1 \
        --dtb-file=$PWD/system/arm/dt/armv8_gem5_v1_1cpu.dtb --disk-image=linaro-minimal-aarch64.img

# Legacy kernels (pre v4.x)

Older gem5 kernels for ARM (pre v4.x) are based on Linaro's Linux kernel
for ARM. These kernels use either the VExpress_EMM (AArch32) or
VExpress_EMM64 (AArch64) gem5 platform. Unlike the newer kernels, there
is a separate AArch32 and AArch64 kernel repository and the device tree
files are shipped with the kernel.

## 32 bit kernel (AArch32)

These are instructions to generate a 32-bit ARM Linux binary.

To checkout the aarch32 kernel, execute the following command:

    git clone https://gem5.googlesource.com/arm/linux-arm-legacy

The repository contains a tag per gem5 kernel release. Check the
[project
page](https://gem5-review.googlesource.com/#/admin/projects/arm/linux-arm-legacy)
for a list of branches and release tags. To checkout a tag, execute the
following in the repository:

    git checkout -b TAGNAME

To compile the kernel, execute the following commands in the
    repository:

    make ARCH=arm CROSS_COMPILE=arm-linux-gnueabihf- vexpress_gem5_server_defconfig
    make ARCH=arm CROSS_COMPILE=arm-linux-gnueabihf- -j `nproc`

Testing the just built
    kernel:

    ./build/ARM/gem5.opt configs/example/fs.py  --kernel=/tmp/linux-arm-gem5/vmlinux \
       --machine-type=VExpress_EMM --dtb-file=/tmp/linux-arm-gem5/arch/arm/boot/dts/vexpress-v2p-ca15-tc1-gem5.dtb

## 64 bit kernel (AArch64)

These are instructions to generate a 64-bit ARM Linux binary.

To checkout the aarch64 kernel, execute the following command:

    git clone https://gem5.googlesource.com/arm/linux-arm64-legacy

The repository contains a tag per gem5 kernel release. Check the
[project
page](https://gem5-review.googlesource.com/#/admin/projects/arm/linux-arm64-legacy)
for a list of branches and release tags. To checkout a tag, execute the
following in the repository:

    git checkout -b TAGNAME

    make ARCH=arm64 CROSS_COMPILE=aarch64-none-elf- gem5_defconfig
    make ARCH=arm64 CROSS_COMPILE=aarch64-none-elf- -j4

Testing the just built
    kernel:

    ./build/ARM/gem5.opt configs/example/fs.py --kernel=/tmp/linux-arm64-gem5/vmlinux --machine-type=VExpress_EMM64 \
        --dtb-file=/tmp/linux-arm64-gem5/arch/arm64/boot/dts/aarch64_gem5_server.dtb --disk-image=linaro-minimal-aarch64.img

# Bootloaders

There are two different bootloaders for gem5. One of 32-bit kernels and
one for 64-bit kernels. They can be compiled using the following
command:

    make -C system/arm/simple_bootloader
    make -C system/arm/aarch64_bootloader/

Once you have compiled the binaries, put them in the binaries directory
in your M5_PATH.
